Documentation/submodule-fetch-config/submodule-fetch-config.asciidoc, before:

About reading and applying configuration of non-checked out revisions during fetch
==================================================================================

The configuration situation to implement recursive submodule fetch is
quite complicated. To discuss and agree on something useable I created
this document. Thanks to Jonathan Nieder and Jens Lehmann for
discussing/brainstorming all the different things with me.

Introduction or What The Hell Do We Talk About
----------------------------------------------

Whether git will fetch or clone a submodule depends on the value of
'submodule.recurseSubmodules' or 'submodule.autoInit' and their
submodule specific relatives.

'recurseSubmodules' configures whether fetch will do a recursive fetch
in submodules. 'autoInit' configures whether a new submodule will be
cloned on fetch and its url copied from the fetched revisions
.gitmodules into .git/config so everything is prepared for checkout to
do a checkout of the submodule.

If fetch or clone are given the --recurse-submodules option the autoinit
configuration is assumed to be true.

We add/rely on the following switches:

 . +--recurse-submodules+
 . 'submodule.autoinit'
 . 'submodule."name".autoinit'
 . 'fetch.recurseSubmodules' (config only)
 . 'submodule."name".fetchRecurseSubmodules' (.gitmodules / config)

For expensive operations we might have a special commandline option like:
+--recurse-submodules=all+ ?

How do we solve conflicting configurations from .gitmodules in commits?

 . We do it the simple way, warn, skip and rely on the user to solve
   them.
 . Later once some more experience is gained we might solve some
   constellations automatically.
 . We output a suggestion how to proceed. E.g.:
----
	git checkout origin/master
	git submodule sync
	git submodule update --init --recursive
----

See the "Configuration precedence" section for information about what
entries can be used to override others.


User Stories
------------

Here we will describe some typical use cases to support the plan we
introduce after this section and hopefully ensure that we do not forget
any important situation.

Clone with submodule enabled
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

E.g.:

----
$ git clone --recurse-submodules your-cool-project
----

 . I expect that all submodules that are contained in the revision to be
   checked out after finishing the clone will also be cloned and its
   urls will be copied from .gitmodules to .git/config
 . I expect that submodules not contained in the revision to be checked out
   will *not* be fetched. Since that can be expensive and old submodules
   are likely not existing anymore.
 . I expect that all submodules contained in revisions that are not
   contained in the revision to be checked out to be cloned / config
   initialized. Since these revisions are likely to be open branches
   with *new* submodules they should be cloned to prepare for later
   integration. Otherwise its likely that the 'on-demand' fetch logic
   will not pickup these new submodules when they are integrated in main
   line causing a recursive checkout to fail.

Submodule Recursion For Checked Out Submodules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this description we only care about submodules that are contained in
the checked out working dir.

I expect all initialized submodules to behave after the local or checked
out configuration (.git/config and .gitmodules).

Let's say we have configured 'submodule.recursesubmodules = on' or given
the '--recurse-submodules[=on]' commandline option to fetch.

Superproject has a linear history:

. I expect "git fetch" to run fetch in all submodules checked out
  in the worktree

. I do not expect it to run fetch in old submodules not
  checked out in the worktree, but I wouldn't mind if it did
  either.

. I expect "git fetch" to clone any new submodules that I would
  need to "git merge --recurse-submodules FETCH_HEAD", and any
  submodules needed for intermediate states.

Superproject has multiple branches:

. Same as before, but I'd expect it to clone or fetch new and
  existing submodules for <existing tip>..<new tip> of all branches.


Submodule Recursion On-Demand (local config)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's say 'submodule.recursesubmodules = on-demand' or given the
'--recurse-submodules=on-demand' commandline option to fetch.

Superproject has a linear history:

. Same as with '--recurse-submodules=on' but I would only expect fetch
  to fetch or clone submodules that have changed/are new in the commits
  fetched

Superproject hast multiple branches:

. Similar to before but also fetch changed/new submodules between
  <existing tip>..<new tip> of all branches.


Submodule Recursion Off (local config)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's say 'submodule.recursesubmodules = off' or commandline option
'--recurse-submodules=off' or no config or option.

No submodules will be fetched


Submodule Recursion Not Checked Out
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's say the submodule is not in the current index (checked out) and
the .gitmodules in all fetched commits agree on submodule <name>'s config
'submodule.<name>.recursesubmodules = on'

. I expect the submodule to be fetched/cloned when the recorded
  submodule-commit was changed in any commit between <existing
  tip>..<new tip>.

. I do not expect the submodule to be fetched/cloned if there was no
  change of the recorded submodule-commit in the fetched commits but I
  would not mind if it was either.

The same applies to 'submodule.<name>.recursesubmodules = on-demand'
except that I would mind if a submodule was fetched which had no change
in the recorded submodule-commit.

Let's assume the same situation as before but the configurations of
'submodule.<name>.recursesubmodules' in .gitmodules of the fetched
commits disagree.

. I expect git to warn me that the configuration of submodule
  <name> was not the same across all fetched commits.

- I expect git to skip the recursive fetch of those submodules and
  tell me what I can do to solve this.


Let's say +submodule.recursesubmodules = off+
 or +--recurse-submodules=off+ commandline option.

. I expect "git fetch" to skip all submodules by default
  except the ones configured otherwise


Implementation Plan or How Can That Work
----------------------------------------

This is a rough description of the recursive fetch/clone strategy.

'changed_submodule_names' is a string_list of submodules names and
additionally stores the result of the parsed final configuration in its
util pointer. It has a conflict marker for entries that have been parsed
but need skipping.

*TODO:* rework to first collect in 'changed_submodule_names' and
then do the fetch in a second stage.

In superproject

. Lookup all changed submodule names from commits received during fetch
  and if it is not contained yet add to 'changed_submodule_names'. During collection phase: For
  each revision that changes a submodule store:
	.. .gitmodules sha1 (for subsequent readings of the same config)
	.. path
	.. name

. For each submodule in the index that is in 'changed_submodule_names'
	.. Fetch depending on local and checked out configuration (and
	   whether referenced commits are already present)
	.. Add submodule to 'fetched_submodules'
	.. Remove submodule from 'changed_submodule_names'

. For each changed submodule left in list from 1.
	.. Skip and warn if not all configurations are the same
	   and no local config for that module
	.. Fetch or clone depending on local configuration or if that
	   does not exist from revisions
	.. Add submodule to 'fetched_submodules'

. For each submodule in .git/modules
	.. Skip if in fetched_submodules
	.. fetch depending on local configuration (e.g. in .git/config)
	   or commandline

. 'Will be left for future extension:' If we were given the special option
  +--recurse-submodules=all+ it overrides all revisions, checked out or
  local recurseSubmodules configurations
	.. Parse all commits .gitmodules
	.. Try to fetch or clone all found module names by their url.
	   Warn and skip submodule names that have conflicting urls in
	   commits. The user can configure the url locally with +git
	   config submodule."name".url+ to solve this situation.


Revisions, .gitmodules And Local Config
---------------------------------------

In this section we will discuss the handling of values from .gitmodules
that are not in the worktree but in revisions.

All configuration values for initialized and checked out submodules in
.git/modules/ like 'recurseSubmodules', 'autoInit', ... come from local
(checked out) config or commandline.

We now describe submodules that are not in the index nor in the checked
out .gitmodules. That means they are only referenced in .gitmodules of
commits. If there is a submodule described in some of the fetched
revisions .gitmodules and we come to the conclusion that it should be
fetched. The fetch automatically clones it into .git/modules and copies
the url from .gitmodules into .git/config

If .gitmodules configuration values disagree between revisions and no
overriding configuration is provided. We fall back on the configured
global default. E.g. : +submodule.recursesubmodules+ or the
+--recurse-submodules-default+ commandline option. If nothing is
configured the current default will be warn and skip.

If all parsed .gitmodules values from fetched commits are consistent we behave
like they say.


Configuration precedence (the latter overrides the earlier)
-----------------------------------------------------------

 1. General config (fetch.RecurseSubmodules)
 2. Command line default (--recurse-submodules-default)
 3. consolidated .gitmodules from each commit
    (submodule."name".fetchRecurseSubmodules)
 4. Per submodule config (system, user, repo)
    (submodule."name".fetchRecurseSubmodules)
 5. Command line option (--recurse-submodules)


Roadmap
-------
Current state: fetching of initialized submodules, but the .gitmodules
config is still taken from the work tree.

Next steps:

. Fetch renamed initialized submodules using the path to name mapping of
  the +.gitmodules+ file of the correct commit.
. Make fetch use the consolidated +.gitmodules+ configuration from all
  fetched commits.
. Implement +autoinit+ config cloning the bare submodule repo into
  +.git/modules+ and initializing them by putting the consolidated URL
  into +.git/config+.

Commit message:

rework implementation plan into two phases

Documentation/submodule-fetch-config/submodule-fetch-config.asciidoc, after:

About reading and applying configuration of non-checked out revisions during fetch
==================================================================================

The configuration situation to implement recursive submodule fetch is
quite complicated. To discuss and agree on something useable I created
this document. Thanks to Jonathan Nieder and Jens Lehmann for
discussing/brainstorming all the different things with me.

Introduction or What The Hell Do We Talk About
----------------------------------------------

Whether git will fetch or clone a submodule depends on the value of
'submodule.recurseSubmodules' or 'submodule.autoInit' and their
submodule specific relatives.

'recurseSubmodules' configures whether fetch will do a recursive fetch
in submodules. 'autoInit' configures whether a new submodule will be
cloned on fetch and its url copied from the fetched revisions
.gitmodules into .git/config so everything is prepared for checkout to
do a checkout of the submodule.

If fetch or clone are given the --recurse-submodules option the autoinit
configuration is assumed to be true.

We add/rely on the following switches:

 . +--recurse-submodules+
 . 'submodule.autoinit'
 . 'submodule."name".autoinit'
 . 'fetch.recurseSubmodules' (config only)
 . 'submodule."name".fetchRecurseSubmodules' (.gitmodules / config)

*TODO:* Talk about the options values like 'on', 'off', 'on-demand' ?

For expensive operations we might have a special commandline option like:
+--recurse-submodules=all+ ?

How do we solve conflicting configurations from .gitmodules in commits?

 . We do it the simple way, warn, skip and rely on the user to solve
   them.
 . Later once some more experience is gained we might solve some
   constellations automatically.
 . We output a suggestion how to proceed. E.g.:
----
	git checkout origin/master
	git submodule sync
	git submodule update --init --recursive
----

See the "Configuration precedence" section for information about what
entries can be used to override others.


User Stories
------------

Here we will describe some typical use cases to support the plan we
introduce after this section and hopefully ensure that we do not forget
any important situation.

Clone with submodule enabled
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

E.g.:

----
$ git clone --recurse-submodules your-cool-project
----

 . I expect that all submodules that are contained in the revision to be
   checked out after finishing the clone will also be cloned and its
   urls will be copied from .gitmodules to .git/config
 . I expect that submodules not contained in the revision to be checked out
   will *not* be fetched. Since that can be expensive and old submodules
   are likely not existing anymore.
 . I expect that all submodules contained in revisions that are not
   contained in the revision to be checked out to be cloned / config
   initialized. Since these revisions are likely to be open branches
   with *new* submodules they should be cloned to prepare for later
   integration. Otherwise its likely that the 'on-demand' fetch logic
   will not pickup these new submodules when they are integrated in main
   line causing a recursive checkout to fail.

Submodule Recursion For Checked Out Submodules
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this description we only care about submodules that are contained in
the checked out working dir.

I expect all initialized submodules to behave after the local or checked
out configuration (.git/config and .gitmodules).

Let's say we have configured 'submodule.recursesubmodules = on' or given
the '--recurse-submodules[=on]' commandline option to fetch.

Superproject has a linear history:

. I expect "git fetch" to run fetch in all submodules checked out
  in the worktree

. I do not expect it to run fetch in old submodules not
  checked out in the worktree, but I wouldn't mind if it did
  either.

. I expect "git fetch" to clone any new submodules that I would
  need to "git merge --recurse-submodules FETCH_HEAD", and any
  submodules needed for intermediate states.

Superproject has multiple branches:

. Same as before, but I'd expect it to clone or fetch new and
  existing submodules for <existing tip>..<new tip> of all branches.


Submodule Recursion On-Demand (local config)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's say 'submodule.recursesubmodules = on-demand' or given the
'--recurse-submodules=on-demand' commandline option to fetch.

Superproject has a linear history:

. Same as with '--recurse-submodules=on' but I would only expect fetch
  to fetch or clone submodules that have changed/are new in the commits
  fetched

Superproject hast multiple branches:

. Similar to before but also fetch changed/new submodules between
  <existing tip>..<new tip> of all branches.


Submodule Recursion Off (local config)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's say 'submodule.recursesubmodules = off' or commandline option
'--recurse-submodules=off' or no config or option.

No submodules will be fetched


Submodule Recursion Not Checked Out
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Let's say the submodule is not in the current index (checked out) and
the .gitmodules in all fetched commits agree on submodule <name>'s config
'submodule.<name>.recursesubmodules = on'

. I expect the submodule to be fetched/cloned when the recorded
  submodule-commit was changed in any commit between <existing
  tip>..<new tip>.

. I do not expect the submodule to be fetched/cloned if there was no
  change of the recorded submodule-commit in the fetched commits but I
  would not mind if it was either.

The same applies to 'submodule.<name>.recursesubmodules = on-demand'
except that I would mind if a submodule was fetched which had no change
in the recorded submodule-commit.

Let's assume the same situation as before but the configurations of
'submodule.<name>.recursesubmodules' in .gitmodules of the fetched
commits disagree.

. I expect git to warn me that the configuration of submodule
  <name> was not the same across all fetched commits.

- I expect git to skip the recursive fetch of those submodules and
  tell me what I can do to solve this.


Let's say +submodule.recursesubmodules = off+
 or +--recurse-submodules=off+ commandline option.

. I expect "git fetch" to skip all submodules by default
  except the ones configured otherwise


Implementation Plan or How Can That Work
----------------------------------------

This is a rough description of the recursive fetch/clone strategy. We
concentrate on the 'on-demand' case. Since 'on' and 'off' are quite
simple.

'changed_submodule_names' is a string_list of submodules names and
additionally stores the result of the parsed final configuration in its
util pointer. It has a conflict marker for entries that have been parsed
but need skipping.

For +--recurse-submodules=on+ instead of the first step (adding only
fetched revisions), add all names from .git/modules to
'changed_submodule_names'. And add all submodules that exist in new
revisions.

*TODO:* rename 'changed_submodule_names' variable to reflect the 'on'
case.

In superproject

. Lookup all changed submodule names from commits received during fetch
  and if it is not contained in the list yet add to
  'changed_submodule_names'. During collection phase: For each revision
  that changes a submodule store in a parse cache:
	.. .gitmodules sha1 (for subsequent readings of the same config)
	.. path
	.. name

. For each submodule in the index that is in 'changed_submodule_names'
	.. Read and parse local and checked out configuration and reset
	   conflict marker
	.. Mark entry as 'finished_parsing'.

. For each entry in 'changed_submodule_names' not marked 'finished_parsing'
	.. Skip if entry has 'finished_parsing' flag set.
	.. Skip if entry has no conflict.
	.. Read and parse local and checked out configuration and reset
	   conflict marker in entry if the local config solves the conflict.
	   *TODO:* It seems we need a conflict marker for every single
	   value so we can decide what caused the conflict and when it
	   is resolved.
	.. Mark entry as solved if last step was successful.

. Fetch / Clone all submodules in 'changed_submodule_names' depending on
  stored configuration in that list, the conflict marker and whether
  referenced commits are already present.

. 'Will be left for future extension:' If we were given the special option
  +--recurse-submodules=all+ it overrides all revisions, checked out or
  local recurseSubmodules configurations
	.. Parse all commits .gitmodules
	.. Try to fetch or clone all found module names by their url.
	   Warn and skip submodule names that have conflicting urls in
	   commits. The user can configure the url locally with +git
	   config submodule."name".url+ to solve this situation.


Revisions, .gitmodules And Local Config
---------------------------------------

In this section we will discuss the handling of values from .gitmodules
that are not in the worktree but in revisions.

All configuration values for initialized and checked out submodules in
.git/modules/ like 'recurseSubmodules', 'autoInit', ... come from local
(checked out) config or commandline.

We now describe submodules that are not in the index nor in the checked
out .gitmodules. That means they are only referenced in .gitmodules of
commits. If there is a submodule described in some of the fetched
revisions .gitmodules and we come to the conclusion that it should be
fetched. The fetch automatically clones it into .git/modules and copies
the url from .gitmodules into .git/config

If .gitmodules configuration values disagree between revisions and no
overriding configuration is provided. We fall back on the configured
global default. E.g. : +submodule.recursesubmodules+ or the
+--recurse-submodules-default+ commandline option. If nothing is
configured the current default will be warn and skip.

If all parsed .gitmodules values from fetched commits are consistent we behave
like they say.


Configuration precedence (the latter overrides the earlier)
-----------------------------------------------------------

 1. General config (fetch.RecurseSubmodules)
 2. Command line default (--recurse-submodules-default)
 3. consolidated .gitmodules from each commit
    (submodule."name".fetchRecurseSubmodules)
 4. Per submodule config (system, user, repo)
    (submodule."name".fetchRecurseSubmodules)
 5. Command line option (--recurse-submodules)


Roadmap
-------
Current state: fetching of initialized submodules, but the .gitmodules
config is still taken from the work tree.

Next steps:

. Fetch renamed initialized submodules using the path to name mapping of
  the +.gitmodules+ file of the correct commit.
. Make fetch use the consolidated +.gitmodules+ configuration from all
  fetched commits.
. Implement +autoinit+ config cloning the bare submodule repo into
  +.git/modules+ and initializing them by putting the consolidated URL
  into +.git/config+.
